Title:Clinton's the choice. (newspapers' presidential endorsements).
Author(s):George Garneau. 
Source:Editor & Publisher 125.n43 (Oct 24, 1992): pp9(5). (2587 words) 
Document Type:Magazine/Journal
Bookmark:Bookmark this Document
Library Links:

    *

Abstract:

Presidential candidate Bill Clinton has garnered more newspaper endorsements the President Bush, according to a 1992 Editor & Publisher poll. Of the 813 daily newspapers responding to the poll, 149 endorsed Clinton, 121 endorsed Bush, and one endorsed Ross Perot. The remaining respondents were uncommitted or do not, as a matter of policy, give endorsements. The Democratic candidate, Clinton, has gained more endorsements that the Republican candidate for the first time since the 1964 election.

Full Text :COPYRIGHT 1992 VNU Business Media

E&P's Quadrennial Presidential Poll shows, for the first time since 1964, that more newspapers endorsed the Democratic candidate

FOR THE FIRST time since Lyndon Johnson swamped Barry Goldwater in 1964, more newspapers are supporting a Democrat for president than a Republican, according to E&P's quadrennial poll.

Democratic Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas garnered editorial stamps of approval from 149 papers, compared with 121 papers for incumbent Republican George Bush.

Of the papers responding, 18.3%, representing 11 million circulation, endorsed Clinton, versus 14.9%, representing 7.1 million circulation, for Bush.

Standing alone, the 9,000-circulation McCook (Neb.) Daily Gazette said it intends to endorse independent Ross Perot.

The last significant independent, John Anderson in 1980, earned endorsements from 40 newspapers.

The poll included 813 papers responding with postcards or to phone inquiries. That is more than half of the nation's 1,586 dailies, according to the Editor & Publisher International Year-Book 1992.

Since 1940, newspapers have endorsed Republicans by overwhelming margins--except when Johnson edged Goldwater, 440 endorsements to 359.

The poll also found a larger proportion of newspapers than ever before-66.7%--have not endorsed a candidate, either because of non-endorsement policies or because they had not done so when the poll was completed. In 1988, 62.8% of papers had not endorsed.

The latest findings confirm a trend dating from the poll's beginning in 1940, when just 13.4% of papers were uncommitted.

Major papers supporting Clinton thus far include: the St. Louis Post Dispatch; Boston Globe; Courier-Journal in Louisville, Ky.; McClatchy Newspapers' Sacramento Bee, Modesto Bee and Fresno Bee in California; Chicago Sun Times; Washington Post; Charlotte (N.C.) Observer; El Paso Times and Newsday on Long Island and New York City.

Papers for Bush included the Chicago Tribune, Detroit News, Dallas Morning News, San Antonio Express Mail and 13 Scripps Howard newspapers, including the Rocky Mountain News and strikecrippled Pittsburgh Press, which endorsed via its facsimile newspaper.

The dramatic swing from Republican to Democratic looks like a pocketbook issue for newspapers, said Joan Konner, dean of the Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism, since the newspaper industry has been pummelled by one of the worst recessions in decades.

(In the last presidential election, Democratic candidate Michael Dukakis received endorsements from only 51 newspapers or 7.7% of the total, while Bush was endorsed by 195 newspapers or 29.5% of the total.)

"The main concern of the election is the economy, and certainly the newspaper industry has been facing its own troubled economy," she said, suggesting that changing regulations in Washington have created new competitive threats from telephone companies.

"Perhaps that adds up to a change in the publishers' outlook," she said.

American Universty School of Communication Dean Sanford Ungar said the swing reflected wide dissatisaction.

Of newspapers making endorsements, reasons varied. Some came only reluctantly. Many were withheld.

"The choice for president this time around is easy," the Washington Post editorialized Oct. 11. "The country is drifting and worn down; it badly needs to be reenergized and given new direction. Bill Clinton is the only candidate with a chance of doing that."

The Post said Bush had "long since squandered whatever claim he had to national leadership," adding, "The presidency is in part a test, and Mr. Bush has failed."

The Detroit News said it was less than satisfied with Bush's performance but Clinton would be worse.

"Four more years of George Bush may not be pretty," the News editorialized, but four years of Clinton "could be even less appetizing."

The 15,000-circlation Farmington, N.M., Daily Times endorsed Bush as "the only pro-life candidate," noted publisher Eliot O'Brien.

McCook Daily Gazette publisher Gene O. Morris said he will endorse Perot Oct. 28 to send "a wake-up call to America" for citizens to reclaim their government.

Only Perot represents "a clean break with the past," he said, because Clinton and Bush are tied to "past obligations through the political process." Morris said the issue goes beyond Perot, to whether leaders work for, rather than victimize, citizens.

The Los Angeles Times abided by its policy not to endorse, and the New York Times had not made its endorsement as E&P went to press.

The Bulletin in Bend, Ore., was leaning toward Perot but decided to reject all comers.

"We ran an unendorsement editorial saying we wouldn't endorse any of them because none of them were worthy of the job," said chairman, CEO and editor Robert W. Chandler.

"I couldn't bring myself personally to endorse any of them."

In the hometowns

Breaking its 1899 policy not to endorse national candidates, the 5,000-circulation Hope (Ark.) Star endorsed Clinton, who was born in Hope and later moved to Hot Springs.

Star publisher Jim Perry said the town relished the attention after Clinton topped of his televised nomination acceptance by saying, "I still believe in a place called Hope."

"We felt like with all the attention focused on our community, we better take a look at the race and take a stand," he said, citing the need for change and Bush's lack of plans.

The endorsement came early, Aug. 21, before another favorite son, Perot, who grew up in nearby Texarkana, had rejoined the race.

The Texarkana Gazette abided by its long-standing policy not to endorse.

The Houston Chronicle and Houston Post in Bush's adopted hometown had not made an endorsements as E&P went to press. N or had the Journal Tribune in Biddeford, Me., near the Bush family's Kennebunkport vacation home.

Bush and favorite son Vice President Dan Quayle got a gung-ho endorsement from the Huntington (Ind.) Herald-Press, which is owned by the Quayle family and where the vice president was publisher.

Editor Mike Perkins said Bush was "the only candidate whose programs can forestall an economic disaster."

While Quayle's status as favorite son was a sentimental factor, Perkins said that he was "very happy with Quayle's performance in the campaign." The endorsement decision was his alone, Perkins said.

To endorse or not

The Miami Herald--where editor Jim Hampton nearly resigned eight years ago when then-publisher Richard Capen overruled the editorial board to endorse Ronald Reagan--is not endorsing this year.

"We have a strong sense that people have plenty of information from which to make up their minds," said publisher David Lawrence.

The Herald had a lot of company. The industry set a record, according to E&P's poll, in not endorsing, because of non-endorsement policies, timing, or dissatisfaction with all three candidates.

Many papers view endorsements as a losing game. No matter who they endorse, they make enemies of the other side--an unhealthy matter in some towns. Endorsements are also seen as a threat to a newspaper's objectivity, since few readers understand that news and editorial departments are separate.

"I'm convinced readers believe it is arrogance on the part of newspapers to try to tell them what to vote for," said Bob Wingett, publisher at three small Multimedia dailies of High Valley Publishing Co. in West Virginia and Ohio. The papers gave up endorsing candidates years ago, though they take positions on electoral issues.

In politically charged West Virginia, politics is serious business, and voters resent suggestions about whom to support for office, he said, adding, "I live among the people and I know their attitude. This is something they think is a personal matter.

Konner of Columbia's graduate journalism school said the large number of non-endorsements also reflects public sentiment, with many voters undecided or not fully committed to any candidate.

Edward Jones, incoming president of the nearly 600-member National Conference of Editorial Writers and managing editor and editoral boad member of the Free Lance-Star in Fredericksburg, Va., agreed. Even papers making endorsements were unenthusiastic, he said

"I favor endorsements but I realize some folks in the business are strongly against it," he said. "Perhaps that point of view is slowly gaining favor."

The issue divides NCEW, which often and hotly debates it.

Jones suggested that the growing proportion of papers withholding endorsements was linked to the growth of one-newspaper towns, where papers tend to avoid endorsements to ensure they are perceived as fair.

He hopes increasing chain ownership and targeting of audiences is not leading to inoffensive editorial pages.

"If the trend toward not endorsing is parallel to the trend of taking an inoffensive tack on editorial pages, that's bad news. Because I think editorials should be hardhitting and not succumb to saying some topics are off-limits."

Endorsements are not intended to rally voters to a candidate but to provoke discussion--and at least at his paper they succeeded.

"Our endorsements are among the most talked-about editorials of year," Jones said. "If you're looking to stimulate debate, presidential endorsements will do it every time."

Hope Star publisher Perry received criticism of the paper's Clinton endorsement after 92 years of neutrality but said: "I believe it's part of a newsman's job to go out on a limb. We caught some heat about it, but that's part of the newspaper business."

While important to newspapers, endorsements have little impact on voters, according to Max McCombs, a University of Texas journalism professor who has studied the issue.

"At the presidential level, they have fairly minimal impact because there are so many sources of information," he said, but they do have an impact when voters know little about the office or candidates.

Endorsements can affect undecided voters and close races, he said.

"It can be a tiebreaker," he said.

Scripps Howard

Thirteen Scripps Howard newspaper endorsed Bush after the company's editors and top executives met in September for a traditional powwow.

The company's practice of forming editorial policy on national issues as a group runs counter to most newspaper groups, which take pride in allowing managers of individual newspapers to set editorial policies.

After meetings with officials of both campaigns, the vote by about 13 editors and a half-dozen corporate executives favored Bush by "a several-vote margin," said Dan Thomasson, Scripps Howard executive vice president for news, Washington bureau chief and editor of the Scripps Howard News Service.

An editorial was written by the Washington bureau's editorial writers and all newspapers were bound to run it.

"This process is an absolutely democratic process," he said. "It's not that controversial. We have our arguments and hash it out."

The meetings include "some extraordinarily vigorous discussion," with editors free to express their views and even oppose the company's chairman and president.

"I think everybody appreciates the process and abides by it without rancor, he said.

The process dates from 1916 and founder E.W. Scripps, a press baron who sought to maximize his political impact.

But with editorial policy set jointly with editors--instead of by individual publishers, editors and editorial boards--disputes, such as those at the Miami Herald eight years ago, are avoided.

CLINTON

ALABAMA 

Daily Mountain Eagle 

ALASKA 

Anchorage Daily News 

ARIZONA 

The Arizona Daily Star Douglas Daily Dispatch 

ARKANSAS 

Hope Star Southwest Times Record Benton Courier Jonesboro Sun Stuttgart Daily Leader 

CALIFORNIA 

Contra Costa Times Hollister Free Lance La Opinion San Jose Mercury News El Cajon Daily Californian Fresno Bee Modesto Bee Sacramento Bee Oakland Tribune Vista Press 

COLORADO 

Daily Camera Lamar Daily News 

CONNECTICUT 

Bristol Press Register Citizen 

DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA 

Washington Post 

FLORIDA 

Daytona Beach News-Journal Lake City Reporter 

GEORGIA 

Waycross Journal-Herald 

IDAHO 

Idaho Falls Post Register 

ILLINOIS 

Chicago Sun-Times Southern Illinoisan 

INDIANA 

Portland Commercial Review Bloomfield Evening World Sullivan Daily Times 

IOWA 

Ames Daily Tribune Hawk Eye 

KANSAS 

Parsons Sun Chanute Tribune Junction City Daily Union Emporia Gazette Garden City Telegram Hutchinson News Newton Kansan Olathe Daily News Salina Journal 

KENTUCKY 

Louisville Courier-Journal 

MAINE 

Brunswick Times Record 

MARYLAND 

SalisburyDaily Times 

MASSACHUSETTS 

Taunton Daily Gazette Berkshire Eagle Boston Globe Southbridge News 

MICHIGAN 

Detroit Free Press Ann Arbor News 

MINNESOTA 

St. Paul Pioneer Press 

MISSISSIPPI 

Greenwood Commonwealth 

MISSOURI 

Lake Sun Leader, Camdenton Moberly Monitor-Index St. Louis Post-Dispatch Independence Examiner Springfield News-Leader 

NEBRASKA 

Lincoln Star 

NEVADA 

Las Vegas Sun 

NEW HAMPSHIRE 

Concord Monitor Eagle Times Claremont Portsmouth Herald 

NEW JERSEY 

Burlington County Times CamdenCourier-Post Gloucester County Times 

NEW MEXICO 

New Mexican 

NEW YORK 

Daily Freeman Roshester Democrat & Chronicle Newsday Utica Observer-Dispatch Canandaigua Daily Messenger The Saratogian 

NORTH CAROLINA 

Richmond County Daily Journal Charlotte Observer Geenville Daily Reflector Ralleigh News & Observer Washington Daily News 

NORTH DAKOTA 

Grand Forks Herald 

OHIO 

Dayton Daily News Springfield News-Sun Athens Messenger Medina County Gazette 

OKLAHOMA 

Elk City Daily News Okmulgee Daily Times Ada Evening News Pryor Daily Times Norman Transcript Seminole Producer Woodward News 

OREGON 

Salem Statesman-Journal The Daily Astorian The Oregonian, Portland 

PENNSYLVANIA 

Centre Daily Times Wilkes-Barre Citizens' Voice Delaware County Daily Times Uniontown Herald-Standard Lancaster Intelligencer Journal New Castle News Pocono Record Sunbury Daily Item Daily News Easton Express-Times Philadelphia Daily News Philadelphia Inquirer The Phoenix York Daily Record 

SOUTH CAROLINA 

Anderson Independent-Mail 

SOUTH DAKOTA 

Brookings Daily Register 

TENNESSEE 

Nashville Banner Chattanooga Times Jackson Sun Nashville Tennessean 

TEXAS 

Edinburg Daily Review El Paso Times Bonham Favorite Fort Worth Star-Telegram Longview News-Journal Marshall News Messenger Mineral Wells Index Palestine Herald-Press San Angelo Standard-Times Stephenville Empire-Tribune Temple Daily Telegram Galveston Daily News Huntsville Item Lufkin Daily News Orange Leader Seguin Gazette-Enterprise Waco Tribune-Herald 

VERMONT 

Brattleboro Reformer Burlington Free Press 

VIRGINIA 

Charlottesville Daily Progress 

WASHINGTON 

Ellensburg Daily Record Seattle Post-Intelligencer The Columbian Longview Daily News Everett Herald The Olympian Seattle Times Spokane Spokesman-Review Tri-City Herald 

WEST VIRGINIA 

Charleston Gazette 

WISCONSIN 

La Crosse Tribune The Capital Times Milwaukee Journal 

WYOMING 

Rock Springs Daily Rocket-Miner

GHW BUSH

ALABAMA 

Birmingham Post-Herald Mobile Register 

ARIZONA 

Casa Grande Dispatch Arizona Republic Prescott Courier 

ARKANSAS 

Harrison Daily Times 

CALIFORNIA 

Fairfield Daily Republic Lodi News-Sentinel San Pedro News-Pilot Redding Record Searchlight Torrance Daily Breeze Victorville Daily Press Santa Monica Outlook Sacramento Union San Diego Union-Tribune 

COLORADO 

Rocky Mountain News Pueblo Chieftain 

CONNECTICUT 

New Haven Register 

FLORIDA 

Naples Daily News Winter Haven News Chief 

GEORGIA 

Athens Daily News Atlanta Daily World Griffin Daily News Rome News-Tribune Savannah Morning News Augusta Chronicle 

ILLINOIS 

Chicago Tribune Jacksonville Journal Courier Belleville News-Democrat 

INDIANA 

Greenfield Daily Reporter Huntington Herald-Press Gary Post-Tribune 

IOWA 

Sioux City Journal Times-Republican 

KANSAS 

Norton Daily Telegram Tiller & Toiler Topeka Capital-Journal 

LOUISIANA 

Lake Charles American Press 

MARYLAND 

Annapolis Capital Montgomery Journal 

MICHIGAN 

Detroit News 

MINNESOTA 

West Central Tribune 

MISSISSIPPI 

Brookhaven Daily Leader Mississippi Press Vicksburg Evening Post 

MISSOURI 

Hannibal Courier-Post Kirksville Daily Express & New Rolla Daily News Blue Springs Examiner Joplin Globe Lebanon Daily Record West Plains Daily Quill 

NEBRASKA 

Columbus Telegram Holdrege Daily Citizen Kearney Hub Norfolk Daily News Grand Island Independent York News-Times 

NEVADA 

Elko Daily Free Press Nevada Appeal 

NEW HAMPSHIRE 

Foster's Democrat Conway Daily Sun Manchester Union Leader 

NEW JERSEY 

The Trentonian 

NEW MEXICO 

Alamogordo Daily News Albuquerque Tribune Farmington Daily Times 

NORTH CAROLINA 

High Point Enterprise Mount Airy News Asheboro Courier-Tribune 

NORTH DAKOTA 

Fargo Forum Wahpeton Daily News Williston Daily Herald 

OHIO 

Mansfield News Journal Cincinnati Post Columbus Dispatch Finlay Courier Wooster Daily Record Lisbon Morning Journal WilloughbyNews-Herald 

OKLAHOMA 

Blackwell Journal-Tribune Edmond Evening Sun Sapulpa Daily Herald Daily Oklahoman Tulsa World 

OREGON 

Coos Bay World 

PENNSYLVANIA 

Pittsburgh Press Wilkes-Barre Times Leader Johnstown Tribune-Democrat 

RHODE ISLAND 

Woonsocket Call 

TENNESSEE 

Chattanooga News-Free Press Morristown Citizen Tribune Memphis Commercial Appeal Knoxville News-Sentinel 

TEXAS 

Abilene Reporter-News Amarillo Daily News Big Spring Herald Bryan-College Station Eagle Denton Record-Chronicle El Paso Herald-Post Gainesville Daily Register Lubbock Avalanche-Journal Midland Reporter-Telegram Plainview Daily Herald San Antonio Express-News Beaumont Enterprise Dallas Morning News Victoria Advocate Wichita Falls Times Record News 

VERMONT 

Caledonian-Record 

VIRGINIA 

Harrisonburg Daily News-Record Newport News Daily Press Bristol Herald-Courier Staunton Daily News Leader The Winchester Star 

WASHINGTON 

Centralia Chronicle Bremerton Sun 

WEST VIRGINIA 

Charleston Daily Mail 

WISCONSIN 

Milwaukee Sentinel Oshkosh Northwestern Janesville Gazette

ROSS PEROT

NEBRASKA 

McCook Daily Gazette

-------------------------------------

Source Citation:Garneau, George. "Clinton's the choice. (newspapers' presidential endorsements)." Editor & Publisher 125.n43 (Oct 24, 1992): 9(5). Academic OneFile. Gale. University of Texas at Austin. 28 Oct. 2008 
<http://find.galegroup.com.ezproxy.lib.utexas.edu/itx/start.do?prodId=AONE>.

Gale Document Number:A12911413
